Yeah, let's kick this off.
Okay, so hello everyone.
I'm Leijie Wang.
I'm a PhD student from University of Washington.
Even though I'm at Seattle, very close to Vancouver,
but because of the visa issues, I cannot come in person
.
So that's why I'm over the Zoom.
But today I would like to be glad to present our work
about Blue Sky Custom Feeds and the title, Understand the
Landscape of Custom Feeds on Blue Sky.
I'll start with thinking about the platforms you use every day
.
Like YouTube, TikTok, Instagram, or Spotify.
Each of them has a recommendation feed that feels quite personal to
you.
But you have no saying how that particular algorithm works or what
you're optimized for.
Like whether you're optimized for likes or dislikes.
The ranking is just instead decided by those single centralized algorithms controlled
by those big companies.
And this concentration of power in these days has two consequences.
So first, you don't have no visibility into why certain
content appeal into their feed.
The algorithm is just a black box.
And we see a lot of complaints about them in these days
.
And the second, creators often learn to optimize for that particular
algorithm to appease them.
And over time, we can see the content start to become
homogeneous everywhere.
Like there are all kinds of clickbait kind of content.
And this is what Blue Sky does something different here.
Like they call algorithmic choice.
Blue Sky Custom Feeds allow users to create, subscribe,
and share their feed algorithms instead of being stuck with that particular
default.
And on the consumer side, the field consumers, they can
further subscribe to the feeds offered by their communities.
And on the creator side, third-party tools make it
possible for anyone to build and publish their own feeds.
This connects to a very long-standing vision in the research
community, the idea of middleware.
The core idea is simple.
What if the social media services, like recommendation, moderation,
or the governance in the communities, did not have to be
controlled by the platforms?
What if they could be provided by these independent middleware services
so that users have the choice among them?
And this is just a theoretical vision is already happening at scale
.
Today, as people already know in the room, like the
Blue Sky today has 42 million active users and over 40,
000 custom feeds have been created.
So this makes custom feeds as the first large-scale instant
iation of the middleware vision for feed recommendation specifically.
But for this particular ecosystem to work, someone has to actually
build in their feeds.
And that's the feed creators we focus in this particular work
.
But we know little about them.
Like, what motivates them to create feeds in the first place
?
And what does it actually take to run a particular custom feed
And what challenges and opportunities do they face?
These are the questions driving our work.
So in particular, we organize our work around these three research
questions.
First, what kinds of custom feeds are there?
Second, what kinds of how do the feed creators building,
maintaining, and sustaining their custom feed ecosystem?
Third, what kinds of challenges and opportunities exist for the custom
feed ecosystem?
To answer these research questions, we conducted semi-structured
interviews with 24 feed creators on Blue Sky.
And this particular chart shows the range of feeds they created,
measured by the likes they received on Blue Sky.
Some creators that are relatively small, with under like 100 likes
.
But there are others who are building feeds over 10,000
likes.
So we have a good spread in our interviews, from the
hobbyist builders to some of the most popular feeds on the
platform.
And here we talk about our findings.
Our first key finding is that we identify there are two kinds
of feed orientations that the custom feeds can fall into.
The first is the utility-providing feed.
They are focused on delivering the content to the feed consumers,
thinking of them as a well-curated feeder, filter
.
And there's also community-building feeds that are very different
They're cultivating the space for the feed consumers to connect
with each other.
And as we will see, these two orientations shape their
motivations, their daily tasks, and how they're sustaining their
feeds in the long term.
Specific for the utility-providing feeds, the feed
is primarily a content delivery mechanism for the feed consumers.
The creator's job is mostly done as setup.
They configure the hashtags, keywords, or data accounts, and
just let the feed run on the blue sky.
On the other hand, the feed consumers, they are purely
receptive or passive.
They just follow the feed like they're following a particular channel
or follow a particular blog site.
They do not actively contribute to what particular content appears in the
feed by themselves.
And within the utility feed, we also see two distinct sub
types.
The first is what we call set it and forget it mode
.
People just catch the relevant post of a given topic just with
a very simple list of keywords, such as mushrooms or some
fan communities.
The creator just sets it up once and just largely forgot it
and step away.
The second type is very highly curated feeds, those use v
etted poster lists or custom ranking algorithms to ensure the content they
delivered are super high quality.
It's almost like an editor's choice or editor's pick
in the newspapers.
Unlike the first type, they require very ongoing maintenance.
The creators constantly turning and tuning and updating their algorithms to ensure
the content is always high quality.
Community building feeds work very differently from these utility feeds.
Here, the feed consumers are not just passive recipients.
They actively contribute in the content and interact with each other simply
by the feed, like they were adding a particular keyword to
their post so that they're essentially having conversations with each other
in the feed.
The feed becomes a very shared social place, and the feed
creator's role shifts here too.
Instead of configuring rules, they tend to be social space
, maintaining norms and keeping the community healthy.
I will give you two concrete examples of community building feeds.
So there's a particular feed that we found out in our
interviews.
They just surface a post from the users below a particular threshold
of follower numbers so that they can design it to welcome the
newcomers and give the less known voices a chance to be
seen in their feed.
And another, just like the feed consumers curating the content
by themselves.
So they can just reply to any post on Blue Sky with
a particular keyword.
And in this way, they are nominating the post to
appear in the feed automatically.
And one of our participants captured the creator's role very well
.
They said, I almost see myself as a librarian.
I'm making sure people are not yelling.
They are not picking up their trash and putting books back when
they are supposed to be.
I'm making a place as presentable and welcoming as possible
.
So they are just tending to that particular social space as
a feed creator, which is very different from the utility feed
creators.
And after that, let's take a look at how people
are building their custom feeds.
And we found out that most feed creators navigate an ecosystem of
third-party tools.
They do not have to start from scratch.
But for some of them, those tools are not enough for
their needs.
So they end up building their own infrastructures.
So for example, most feed creators, they rely on third
-party tools.
And there is a real diversity of options for them.
Brown Sky Feed, Blue Sky Feed creators, and Grace,
just to name a few.
So the variety matters, it means that the creators can always
choose a tool that best fits their needs and their technical levels
.
Within these tools, creators try to combine various kinds of building
blocks to shape what appears in the feed.
Some using those keywords or regular expression matching to catch a post
on a specific topic.
Others try to maintain the vetted accounts list, hand-
picking who got included in their feed.
And some also use a Blue Sky Labellers system to
help filter the content as part of their content moderation efforts.
But the third-party do not work for everyone.
Some creators have the needs that go beyond what existing tools can
support.
And they end up building their own infrastructures.
So for instance, one participant built a fully personalized recommendation system
on their own.
Because they need a fine-grained interaction data that this
third-party tool simply cannot access.
And another tried to run a custom implementation in Rust because their
feed lodges are often too complex for any block-based
tools offered by these third-party tools.
And they also need to support a much larger scale of use
.
So in this way, these feed creators are not casual hobby
ists who just try it for fun.
They are essentially running some independent technical infrastructure through the custom feeds
.
And our third key finding is about what it takes to maintain
a custom feed over time.
And it turns out the maintenance goes well beyond just keeping the
hour with them running.
Creators are handling moderation, deriving discovery, and try
to listen to the consumer feedback.
And for most of these tasks, they get very little support
from the Blue Sky platform.
So for instance, the utility providing feed, the moderation effort
is very different across these different kinds of feeds.
But for the utility providing feeds, it's more about largely
upfront effort.
They set up some strict rules to deliver the content, which
means that usually there isn't much toxic content to moderate for
after the feed goes alive.
But for the community feed, it's often ongoing because the
community itself is always evolving.
There's new member joins, there's new dynamic emerge,
and norms need to be actively maintained.
And on top of that, the moderation deletion is
also much more nuanced.
It's not just about the topic being misaligned with
your feed topic, but instead it's a social delet
ion.
They need to carefully make sure their deletions do not
hurt the community relationship.
And the Blue Sky also decentralizes the creation of the feed
, but they do not decentralize the discovery of the feed
.
The feed tab on the Blue Sky is often static, ranked
by the popularities, serving the same set of feeds that
were popular two years ago.
And for the new feeds, especially non-engaged ones
, they have little chance to be seen by the newcomers
.
And the creators need to take matters into their own time.
They have to promote the feeds by themselves, on the social
media, in the communities, whenever they can.
And we heard these frustrations directed from the creators.
One participant told us, I have been commenting on every single
feed topic post I found, telling them about the feeds and
how to set up their Blue Sky accounts.
And they've sent out thousands of messages.
And they concluded that, even though the feed is successful,
but obviously it's not a sustainable strategy for a lot of
feed creators.
And another participant complained that, if creating a new account and
they go to the feed tab, you will see the same
top feed from two years ago.
They are all in English and often only about the United States
.
So it's not interesting for the people outside of the United
States.
And the centralized algorithms can improve the continuously on these YouTube or
TikTok platforms.
They're listening to your clicks, your skips, and
the dwell times, and feedback into their recommendation algorithms.
But in the Blue Sky for the custom feeds, they have
not that kind of infrastructure.
There are several kinds of feedback they can tap into, like
they get some implicit feedbacks from the people who likes,
replies, or reposts their feeds from their custom feeds
.
But they lack the technical tools to actually analyze and learn from
this data at scale.
They also got a lot of some sort of explicit feedback from
their direct messages or some survey responses they distributed in their feed
.
But it's often very rare and only come from the people
who are mostly motivated to consume their feed content.
There are also some third-party tools that provide some basic
analytics, things like the daily active users or the posted volumes
.
But this only tells the feed creators that the feed is still
alive, but not whether it's actually working on that.
The result is that the feed creators do not get a lot
of feedback to continuously improving their feed.
And in the long term, they just lose their motivation to
do that.
And our fourth and final key finding is about sustaining the custom
feeds.
The custom feed ecosystem, over 40,000 feeds, run
almost entirely on volunteer labels.
Creators need to adopt the cost of running the feed themselves
, with very little to no platform support.
And what is sustaining them isn't their financial incentives or the
platform recognitions.
It's often just intrinsic motivation.
And if we take a step back, there's some cost
of sustaining a feed.
And on the infrastructure side, the creators need to pay out
of the pocket for third-party tool subscriptions to keep their
feed running.
And beyond the money, there's also time commitment.
They have to do the regular maintenance, moderation, and responding
to the user feedback.
But what keeps the creator going, we call it the hobby
ist model.
The motivation is the owning few.
For the utility-providing creators, seeing their subscriber account
grow is a key signal.
It tells them the feed is still useful and worth maintaining.
But that also is saying that without that particular signal, feed
creators are more likely to lose motivations.
And that's why we have this bunch of set and forget
it feeds for the utility part.
For the community-building creators, the motivation comes from something
very different.
They are seeing that people are actually connecting with each other through
their feed.
And that makes them happy about their job.
But this mirrors what we see in those volunteer ecosystems like Reddit
and Discord, where the community itself is just a reward.
We also asked about feed creators about monetarization, and
most felt that not all the feeds can justify it.
The key factor is that whether the feed is built on dedicated
, irreplaceable effort.
So, for example, the set and forget feeds, they
are very easy to replicate.
If someone charges for it, users can just build the feeds
by themselves, elsewhere.
But for the highly curated feeds, they are very different.
The creators have the ongoing effort and judgment to make the feed
valuable to their feed consumers.
And we do see some successful examples of monetarization in
that space in our interviews.
Creators volunteer their efforts very willingly, but they also think
the infrastructure costs deserve some financial support.
One participant put it very simply that it's not about getting
rich.
It's just about getting covering expense.
So I'm not going to pay out of the pocket to
help the community.
And another friend, even more positive, they're charging a
small amount of dollars isn't just fair to the creators.
It's creating a positive loop of dollars going through the communities
so that the whole Blue Sky Custom Feeds can go more
alive.
So with all these findings, we have these two design implications
to see how we can further improve the Blue Sky Custom Fe
eds as a community, and also as researchers.
We see there's two key directions to better support feed creators
beyond the initial building process.
First, we need to help creators to better make sense of
the implicit feedback they get from their feed creators.
Feed consumers like likes, reports, and replies exist.
But creators need to better choose to better turn into that noisy
data, into some actionable insights they can use to improve their
feeds.
Second, we also need to rethink about the feed discovery.
Right now, it's still platform-controlled, even though
it's very fair-controlled, like it's always ranked
by the popularities.
But enabling more personalized feed discovery, beyond just the platform-
controlled ranking, will give new users, and not English feeds
, a real chance to reach to the right users.
And we also want to say something about the sustainability.
If creators burn out and cannot cover their costs, feeds just
will stop being maintained, and the communities building around them will
slowly go away.
From our interviews, we've found two potential positives that the
feed creators themselves are already experienced with.
One is their donations.
They will solicit some donations from their feed consumers.
This is similar to how the Wikipedia sustain itself through those volunteer
-like community donations.
And we also see those popular feeds doing transparent advertising.
They have some ads within their feeds, but the ad is
opt-in, and the community scoped ads, so
that they can keep the revenue, but do not deliver like
very irrelevant ads to their consumers.
Although, neither of them is a perfect solution, but they
both point out towards a model where the community of the custom
feeds can support the infrastructure and support itself in the long term
.
Here's all of our presentations, and thank you for everyone
listening, even though it's over Zoom.
And do you have any questions?
And here's my contact.
Do we have any questions, comments, thoughts
?
Nope?
Oh, what you got?
If you were managing Blue Sky, the app, what would
you do?
The question was, if you were managing Blue Sky, the
app, what would you do?
I think, as I can see in the design implications,
I would at least try to improve the feed discovery feature.
Like, I think people do want that part to be,
like, it's inevitable they're going to be some sort
of centralized by the Blue Sky platform to design how to rank
in these different kinds of feeds.
But obviously, I think one single feature you can see just
to recommend relevant feeds for people to explore, so that they
're not being stuck in those popularity ranking feeds, which is
always just the same set of feeds all over the years.
And I think another important part people constantly want is about better
guidelines, about how to do the advertisement in their feeds.
Like, people are kind of trying to figure it out by
themselves and trying to testing that in their own population, the
consumer's populations.
But it's more beneficial for them to see, like,
what kinds of ads are tolerable in the feeds so that
they can be more actionable and more comfortable to place ads in
their feeds so that they're not going to do the free
label for the whole ecosystem.
I think that's it.
Thank you very much.
Yeah.
Thank you, everyone.
Cheers.